Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined for a 4th time by Dr.
Christian Miller. He's the AC Reed Professor of Philosophy
at Wake Forest University, and today we're going to
talk about his latest book, The Honest. The Crisis
preserving our most treasured virtue in an increasingly dishonest
world. There is the cover of it. So Christian,
welcome back to the show. It's always a great
pleasure to
everyone. It's great to see you again. It's a
delight to talk to you. I'm thrilled to be
back and talk about honesty.
Yeah, sure. So look, we've already done a conversation
on this topic before, but let's talk a little
bit more about it. And for people who perhaps
haven't watched our first interview on honesty, tell us
first what is honesty and how do you approach
it from a Philosophical perspective because I would imagine
that we could also approach it from a psychological
perspective and maybe we're going to talk about some
of that later when we talk about the science
of dishonesty of honesty and dishonesty, but from a
philosophical perspective, how do you approach it?
Yeah, sure. So, and this is I should say
for listeners who haven't heard the earlier interview, I'm
not gonna presuppose any background. And actually, I wrote
this book, uh, from scratch without assuming anyone has
read anything by me before. So, uh, I'm thinking
of honesty from a philosophical perspective as a character
trait, uh, As one of the virtues, as part
of our character. And so it's not just a
matter of an honest action, like one time I
tell the truth, or one time I don't cheat
on a test. It's more than that. It's a
matter of behavior and a matter of internal psychology,
but it has to be consistent over time and
consistent across situations. So let me unpack that a
little bit more. Um, SO an honest person is
going to act. Honestly, in a variety of circumstances,
whether that's the podcast interview, whether that's the party,
whether that's the, in the classroom, at, at home,
at the office, stably over time, so not just
on Tuesdays, but every Tuesday, every day of the
week, every month of the year, um, in an
honest manner. When honest questions or issues arise. Now,
that might sound pretty straightforward, because you might think
honesty is just a matter of telling the truth,
and that's what we normally gravitate towards, uh, you
know, Pinocchio, Abraham Lincoln, all of our kind of
cultural icons are associated with telling the truth. But
actually, I think it's a lot more nuanced and
A lot more sophisticated than that. Um, HONESTY has
to do with telling the truth for sure, but
it also has to do with preventing cheating, preventing
stealing, preventing BSing or bullshitting, hypocrisy, self-deception, fraud, uh,
misleading statements. So, it covers a lot of moral
territory on the behavioral side. It governs a lot
of our behavior. Plus, and just to wrap it
up here, um, it has to come from the
right kind of heart. So outwardly, you could behave
honestly, and people could say, oh, that must be
a really honest person, but unless we know what
the motivation is for that behavior, why it's being
done. We can't really say for sure whether that
person is honest or not. And so they could
be doing these actions purely for self-serving reasons. They
could be um trying to advance in the company
or not get punished in the company by getting
fired. They could want rewards in the afterlife, they
could want to avoid feeling guilty, make a good
impression on others, get social media followers, all these
kinds of reasons. Uh, COULD motivate honest behavior, but
if they're just about me and benefiting myself, they
don't count as virtuously honest. It has to be
something, uh, that's outward looking. Altruistic, or at least
not egoistic, not self-centered, if we're talking about the
virtue of honesty. And so, I can unpack that
more uh on the motivational side, but to sum
it up, it's actually a multifaceted, nuanced, kind of
complex virtue with behavioral components, as well as internal
psychological components.
Yes, those internal psychological components are very interesting in
this case because there are certainly instances where you
can be honest with the intent of harming other
people, I imagine, and also there are instances where
perhaps you are dishonest but with the intention of
not hurting other people's feelings. For example, right, right,
and that, and that's not a problem if you
are dishonest in that particular kind of, of way,
or, or is it,
yeah, so that's really nice. Um, YOU'RE right that
those things can come apart. So yes, you can
be honest with the intention of hurting someone, so
you could say something brutally honest and cold and,
you know, uh, and harm and harmful to them,
um, with no feeling, a positive, warm feelings behind
it, and still be honest. Um, BECAUSE everything you're
saying is true by your lights, and then you
guess, you can, you can flip it around too,
you could say something dishonest to someone, uh, but
for benevolence or compassionate reasons. So, uh, we have
an expression for that. What at least, um, certain
examples fall under the heading of white lies. I
don't think these are the only kind of examples,
but we have this, this kind of category called
white lies, where, um, you know, how does the
dress look, or how does the dessert taste, or
how, how's a new book read, or, you know,
how's the, how's the podcast going and this kind
of thing. Um, AND You privately have negative reactions.
You don't like the outfit. You don't like the
dessert, you don't like the book, but for what
you think of as compassionate reasons, you don't tell
the truth because you don't want to hurt the
other person's feelings. Uh, THAT can certainly happen. Now,
you said that there's no, I can't remember a
word, exactly word you said, like no negative or
no harmful or effects or something like that, no
problems. Well, I mean, it is still dishonest. Um,
THERE is no getting around the fact that it's,
when it comes to the virtue of honesty, it
is a failure of honesty. It might, at the
same time be a success with respect to another
virtue. We have to know more about the case
and, and unpack the details, but say, compassion or
empathy or something like that, that might get a
check mark there. And so all things considered, it
might be that the dishonesty is outweighed by the
compassion. But I do want to at least flag
that if you don't get to avoid being dishonest
when you tell a white lie.
Mhm. But, but are there specific circumstances where you
think, or cases where you think that it is
actually permissible to lie and it is better to
lie than to be honest?
Yeah, I do. Um, SO we could debate these
white lie cases further. So lots of people, at
least in their ordinary lives, seem to think those
are examples of where it's permissible because they seem
to tell them all the time and they don't
seem to mind too much, uh. I think we
should be very cautious about white lie cases. I'm
a little bit more of a, um, a skeptic
or a pessimist about them. I think lots of
times they're gonna be wrong, but Let's shift to
another example where I think it's clearly morally permissible
to lie. It's not an original example, it's a
very famous one, it's the Nazi at the door
example. Um, IT actually has an earlier iteration in
Immanuel Kant's philosophy. Kant had an example involving an
ax murderer who was looking for a victim, and
you're hiding the victim, would-be victim. And then you
lie to the ax murderer to save the person's
life. Um, THE updated version of this is the
Nazi at the door, so you're, it's World War
II in a German-occupied village. You're a homeowner, you're
protecting a Jewish family. The Nazis are doing a
routine patrol of the neighborhood, going door to door,
saying, you know, do you know where any Jews
are? Do you know where any Jews are? Do
you know where any Jews are? They come to
your door, they knock on it, you know that
if you say, I don't know where any Jews
are, they'll just go to the next house. You
also know that if you say, yes, there are
Jews in the basement, they're gonna come in, arrest
the Jews, take them to a concentration camp, probably
uh take you to one as well. So you're
faced with this dilemma that, you know, at least
this challenge, what do I do? Well, you might
think it's obvious. I think it's pretty clear what
to do. I think you lied to the Nazi.
Um, NOT everyone has always agreed with that, so
Augustine, um, Aquinas probably, and Kant himself, so three
huge names in the history of philosophy, all said
that lying is always wrong. And so it seemed
like they would, uh, take the opposite view, but
overwhelmingly today when I asked my students, when I
ask other people, uh, what would you do, and
not just what would you do, but what should
you do, um, they say it's morally permissible, indeed,
morally obligatory, so that you're morally required to lie
to the Nazis, such that if you don't lie
to the Nazi, you're doing something morally wrong. Um,
SO that has the seemingly paradoxical consequence that sometimes
dishonesty can be morally obligatory. But I don't think
that's too paradoxical because I think when we're talking
about moral obligatory, all things considered. With respect to
honesty, yes, wrong, but all things considered, not just
honesty, but also compassion for the Jewish family, trying
to protect innocent lives, all that kind of thing,
when we weigh in all the considerations, then it's
morally obligatory to lie to the Nazi at the
door.
Yeah, but I mean when it comes to that
case, doesn't it depend a little bit on the
kind of ethics that we adopt, because in that
case, wouldn't we consider it necessary to lie even
more so than permissible necessary to lie if we
adopt a constitution. Sequentialist ethics, but if we look
at it from the ontological ethics perspective or a
virtue ethics perspective, that's the reason why, for example,
someone like Kent would say that you shouldn't lie.
And also, I, I mean, that's one point. And
the other point I was also going to ask
you about when it comes to that example is
the problem there, I mean, if someone tells the
truth, they're I mean if we just look at
it like that, telling the truth, not telling the
truth, I mean actually the person isn't doing anything
wrong. If something wrong is done to the Jews
that the person is hiding, I mean the ones
doing the harm are the Nazis, right? So that's
another perspective that you can take in that case.
Yeah, good,
very good, yeah, yeah. So lots to unpack there.
Let me take it part one and then part
two. Part one is about different theories. Um, YOU'RE,
you're right, the most straightforward approach would be take
a consequentious or a utilitarian view for listeners who
aren't familiar. I would roughly say we're required to
maximize overall utility or overall happiness, and what in
this situation would do that? Well, lying to the
Nazi would do that because you're saving the lives
of this Jewish family. Uh, THAT'S pretty straightforward. Um,
I think from a virtue perspective, however, you could
argue for the same conclusion, um, you could consider
that there are competing virtues. That are at work.
Um, AND now you don't have to, I, I,
I grant, um, this is more controversial and virtue,
uh, people could go in different directions, but, um,
you could at least make the argument from a
virtue perspective that there are competing virtues, honesty on
the one hand, say, compassion on the other hand,
and then you weigh up the virtues, and you
say, well, compassion is more important, and outweighs honesty
in this situation, so all things considered, the virtuous
person would lie to the Nazi. The Kantian case
is by far the hardest, um, although I think
even there it's, it's, uh, it's interestingly, um, not
so straightforward, so. Take Kant's first formulation. So to
a background for this, um, Kant said in the
first formulation of the categorical comparative, you should act
in such a way that, you know, your maximum,
uh, is universalizable. Um, IT'S something that, you know,
if we, if, if everyone were to do this,
we would both, we could conceive of a world
like this, and we could will to live in
a world like this. Well, this is not unique
to me. Uh, A very famous Kantian today, Christine
Korsgaard. Made the point that if you use that
formulation, You could actually support lying to the Nazi.
Um, YOU can't support lying in general, but you
can support lying to save innocent lives. Because you
can imagine a world in which um everyone lies,
lies to wrongdoers to save innocent lives, and you
would want to live in that world where everyone
is doing that. So she made the, the, I
think convincing case that at least part of Kant's
own moral philosophy would support lying to the Nazi.
However, um, now to, to make a concession to
you, um, his second formulation, where he says, uh,
treat others as ends, never merely as means. Which
I, you know, interpret in terms of treat others
with dignity and respect, never with, uh, with price
and instrumental instrumentalizing them. Um, IT'S harder to see
in Coorsgaard herself admits it's harder to see how
that would work, uh, because it looks like if
you lie to the Nazi, you're not treating the
Nazi as an end, you're treating the Nazi merely
as a means, so it does look like that
would not allow you to lie to the Nazi
at the door, uh. Now, that was, that's, so
that's some, some further thoughts on the different theories.
Um, YOUR second point about, well, if you just
tell the, the, um, The Nazi, the truth, and
then your kind of hands are, are washed clean,
and it's all up to the Nazi now. Um,
THAT is an interesting argument. Uh, INTERESTINGLY, also, Kant
makes the same kind of arguments. Um, SO, it
kind of fits together with what we talked about
with Kant, and a reason why, um, he even
takes it further, he says, look, um, perhaps if
you, um, lied, and then unbeknownst to you, the
family had escaped. And gone out the back door,
and now the Nazi is going to encounter the
family. Um, WHEREAS if you just told the truth,
the Nazis wouldn't be able to find the family.
Um, SO you, you can never unders, you know,
anticipate what's gonna happen in the future. Um, SO
that is, I, I'll grant all that, that, that,
that that is a reasonable argument. I don't think
it's a very convincing argument. Um, SO, you know,
uh, in, you know, in general, we can just,
um, wipe our hands of all these things, which
we could have prevented. I could have prevented all
these atrocities. I could have prevented these harms to
others, but, um, hey, I'm just gonna wipe my
hands up and let other people bear the responsibility.
I think there's shared responsibility in these kind of
cases. Um, YOU know, the Nazi bears most of
the responsibility, but I bear some of the responsibility
if I'm not doing everything I can to save
the Jewish family. Mhm.
But I mean, what, what an honest person is
then is not someone who necessarily tells the truth
100% of the time, right? I mean, it's just
that they are consistent in being honest, right? I
mean that they are consistently
honest. Yeah, yeah, good, so. I mean, Uh, first,
just, just to, to finish up the Nazi case
and then talk about honesty more generally, I mean,
honesty by itself, if it was a perfectly honest
person, it would demand that that person tell the
truth to the Nazi. So, in isolation, that virtue
by itself would demand that. Because we're talking in
a richer picture with other virtues at play, I
say a fully virtuous person who has practical wisdom
and has to balance all these different virtues, that's
a different story. Now, on the point of, does
honesty always lead the person to tell the truth?
Well, uh, Honesty as a virtue, like all virtues,
comes in degrees. Um, AND so what does that
mean? That means that, um, you can have someone
who's weakly honest, moderately honest, strongly honest, and fully
honest. Uh, SO if that's right, then look, a
moderately honest person doesn't always tell the truth, doesn't
always not cheat or steal or something, they mess
up from time to time. But when they mess
up, that's not their honesty being expressed, it's despite
um they're having some honest character, it's not fully
honest, and so it doesn't perfectly lead to telling
the truth or not cheating or not stealing. Um,
SO, a fully honest, so now I've rephrase the
question, a fully or perfectly honest person, when acting
in character. Well, um, I think that's a different
story. Then, um, yes, that's going to lead to
honest behavior in every situation where honest behavior is
relevant. Not every situation is like that. I mean,
when you're sleeping, um, when you're, you know, I
don't know, going to the bathroom or something like
that, uh, you know, it's not always gonna be
the case that honesty even applies, but when it
does apply, and you're fully honest. Forgetting the other
virtues. Honesty will always lead to honest behavior.
What about omission? I mean, is it that uh
every time that we omit information to other people,
it necessarily constitutes dishonesty?
I don't think so. No, that's a great question.
Um, LIKE all ethical issues, when we start getting
into them deeply, uh, I think it really depends
on the situation and the context, and we need
to know facts about what's going on. Um, BUT,
yeah, as a general matter, the answer is clearly
not. Um, SO right now, I'm not telling you
facts about my bank account, or my per, you
know, personal life or my private life, my family.
Um, YOU know, am I doing, is that I
dishonest because of that? No. Um, WHAT if you
ask me those facts, and I didn't tell them
to you? I'm still not being dishonest because it
wouldn't be appropriate and the relationship we have wouldn't
be appropriate for me to disclose like my bank
account number or something like that. Um, SO it
has to be with respect to this particular situation,
is it appropriate to leave out certain details or
not? Now, here, I'll give you an example where
it wouldn't be. Um. Uh, THE husband and wife,
um, the husband has been out, uh, last night
at the bar with the guys. The next day,
his wife asked him, what were you doing last
night? Where were you last night? And he says,
uh, I was at the bar with the guys.
Um He gives a misleading answer though, because he
leaves out one crucial word, only. I was only
at the bar with the guys. As a matter
of fact, he went to the bar with the
guy, so he's telling the truth, um, but then
afterwards he went home with another woman and etc.
ETC. Um, HE admits that and gives a very
misleading response to his wife, with the intention of
trying to get her to conclude. That he was
not engaging in. An affair or adultery or up
to no good. Um, THAT'S the case where he
intentionally admitted something that would have been appropriate to
share an honest person would have shared, and that's
dishonest.
OK, but then let's just tweak that example a
little bit and let's say that the guy went
to the bar. Let's say with the intention of
cheating on his wife, but he controlled himself and
he decided not to do it, and then the
next day his wife asked. Hi, so where were
you at? And he tells the same thing that
you mentioned before, but leaves out the fact that
he had this temptation of cheating, but he didn't
go through with it. I mean, because he didn't
do it. Do you think that he's still being
honest or that he should just lay out that
he felt tempted
to do
it?
Yeah, that's, that's a harder one, and that's why
it's always tricky when we get into the details
of situations. I, I, I don't know, I have
to probably think about that more. My initial inclination
is to say that he's not being dishonest with
his wife at that moment, um, because he, you
know, he is telling the accurate truth of where
he was last night. He's not leaving out any
additional places he went to because he didn't go
anywhere else, he was just at the bar with
his friends, um, and then, uh, that's what he
tells his wife. Um. There is a way in
which, though, last night he was dishonest, or at
least might be more properly to say failed to
be honest, because that temptation itself is a mark
of failure of honesty. Um, AND that is what
Aristotle would call a consonant or or a person
of strength of will, but that's not the same
thing as a virtuous person, because a virtuous person
would not struggle with that temptation in the first
place. So we have admirable that he overcame the
temptation, for sure. That's why he's not dishonest. He
didn't give into it, and, and, you know, pursue
another woman, um, but it's still not the same
as being virtuous, because a virtuous person would have
gone to the bar, and never, you know, had
the thought of, uh, spending time in a, you
know, sexual manner with someone there. Um, SO that
I would say is a, a sign of failure
of honesty, um, but I, I'm at least, least
inclined to say the next day, he, he wasn't
dishonest to his wife.
OK, so, and, and what do we know about
people's honesty and dishonesty actually, because, uh, OK, we,
we're, I'm talking here with you. You are a
philosopher, of course, we're going to tackle things here,
mostly from a philosophical perspective of what honesty is
and what's an honest person, but what do we
Actually know about how dishonest or honest people are
in real life.
Yeah, so very good. And I'm, although I'm a
philosopher, I spent a lot of time reading psychology
and other fields. I do a lot of just
interdisciplinary work. So I, I very much care about
the facts on the ground and not just what
I can think of in, in the famous philosophy
armchair. Um. So, that's a big question, and there's
a lot to say. Uh, AND, and as a
matter of fact, uh, a lot of my earlier
research was along these lines, uh, both about how
good people are in general, not just honest, but
how people, good people are with some some of
my earlier books. And then the first honesty book,
uh, really dive into detail about the experimental lecture.
Um, So let me just give you a kind
of quick summary of some of the findings, uh,
OK, and I think what I see is, um,
so first of all, to answer this question, we
could go in a variety of different directions. We
could go to religion, we could go to history,
we could go to current events, we could go
to, um, you know, your own personal life or
people around you. I go empirical. I go to,
to carefully controlled studies. Uh, IN social psychology, personalized
psychology, and other fields like that, which put people
in specific situations and see what they do in
those situations. Um, AND, uh, The overall picture that
emerges for me is at least with respect to
North America and Europe, often there are not many
studies that are, uh, international in scope, um, and
at least with respect to the last 20 years,
because we don't have a lot of studies going
back further in time, uh. The picture is of
a mixed bag here with some good sides to
our character, some bad sides to our character. So
most people are not good enough to count as
honest. Most people are not bad enough to count
as dishonest. It's a mixed character. Uh, LET me,
let me, uh, highlight a little bit of the
good and a little bit of the bad. Um,
OK, uh, a little bit of the good. Uh,
IN chapter two of the book, I talk about
empirical research on lying frequency, um. So, how frequently
do people tell lies? And you might think that
that's gonna be bad, and that can that lies
is good, um, and indeed earlier research was kind
of pessimistic about 2 to 3 lies on average
a day. More recent research though, has found that,
well, if you actually look at individuals, And survey
them, most people don't lie, or at least don't
report that they lie. We can, of course, question
that self-report of lying. Um, SO in one study
in particular, uh, 60% of people said they've not
told a single lie in the last 24 hours.
Most of the rest of the people told very
few lies in the last 24 hours. Only 5%
of people told a significant number of lies in
the last 24 hours. So, this has led to
an actual well established theory called truth default theory,
which says that most people tell the truth most
of the time. That we default into truth telling.
That's our default mindset. We're not neutral. Like, I
might tell the truth, I might lie. I have
to kind of decide, and we don't default into
lying. We default into telling the truth, and we
default into assuming others are telling the truth to
us. So we're default truth biased in what we
expect from other people. So I think overall we
can, of course, challenge that and question it in
some ways, but, but I think that's, that's pretty
positive, um. Now, on the flip side, um, let's
switch to a different kind of behavior, let's switch
to cheating. When you put people into different situations
where there's a monetary incentive to cheat. They will
often, and and and they know they won't get
caught. They will often cheat. So, uh, a quick
study, um, Uh, uh, put people in a situation
where they take a test, 2020 problems on the
test, 50 cents per correct answer, US money, uh,
they come in, they take the test, they turn
in the test, it gets created by the person
in charge. They have no control over anything other
than their own performance. In this, uh, study, I'm
thinking of, they got 7 out of 20 on
average. Another group comes in, same test, same 50
cents, however, they get to grade the materials themselves,
destroy their materials, and just verbally report how well
they did. In the same study, uh, 14 out
of 20 was the average for this group. Um,
7 out of 20 versus 14 out of 20,
clear, I think, evidence of a willingness to cheat
if you think you can get away with it,
and there's some reward for you. Also clearly not
compatible with the virtue of honesty. Um, SO some
evidence that in certain areas we're inclined to be
dishonest, in other areas, we're inclined to be honest,
and so the overall mix. Mixed character position emerges.
Do you think, let me just ask you this,
do you think that perhaps another limitation of those
studies, particularly when we're talking about, uh, self-reporting, is
that, is the way that people understand what a
lie is? I mean, could it be that Some
of the things that we've been talking about here,
like what people tend to consider white lies, if
they are asked, they would just say, Yeah, I
didn't tell any lies today, but they actually told
white lies, but they just don't consider that a
lie.
Yeah, good, good, good. Uh, THAT definitely could be
a limitation, and I, I don't recall off the
top of my head how carefully the studies were
run with that in mind. I would hope that
they defined what a lie is to the participants
and made it very clear, this is what we're,
what we're talking about is what we're asking you
about. However, I suspect that not all of them
did do that. Um, LET me, at least though,
in their defense of the studies, not knowing what
the answer to this, to your question is, um,
Uh, they did at least find individual differences. So
it it would have been highly suspicious of people
like across the board said, I don't tell any
lies. And I, I would wonder, like, either they're
just deceiving themselves, or they're just lying about the
number of lies they told, or they're confused about
what a lie is, um, because they have the
wrong definition in their minds. But, um, not only
were those, I already told you the individual differences,
like 5% telling a lot of lies, in another
study, uh, they Uh, they tracked participants over 3
months. And so the same people were asked every
day over the course of 3 months, and that's
just, not only were there individual differences across people,
but there were individual differences in terms of from
day to day. So a person would say, I
told no lies on this day, and the next
day, oh, I told 2 lies. Next day, I
told 5 lies. Um, SO they, they understood themselves
to be telling lies of some kind or other,
and varying in the frequency of it. Um, ALTHOUGH
I, I, I fully admit, um, it probably, uh,
was not as carefully done as you and I
would have liked.
Mhm. OK. Let me ask you this because the
title of your book is The Honesty Crisis. I
mean, uh, do you really mean that, that there
is an actual, uh, crisis, an actual honesty crisis
that we're living in? Um.
Well, I, I probably should be honest, I mean,
it seems appropriate for like a topic like this,
right? Um, SOME of that was probably rhetorical flourish
or just, you know, to grab attention. Um, IT
seems like there are crises everywhere and putting that
in the title is, is going to stand out.
However, um, I did mean it intentionally. Um, Let
me first define what I, uh, I have in
mind by an honesty crisis. So I, I do
have a definition in mind. Um, AND then, um,
let me give you an example where I think
it's probably accurate to say it really is a
crisis. Um, uh, SO I mean by this something
specific, uh, two features. One, dishonesty has become much
more tempting than it was before. We have an
honesty crisis when dishonesty is much more tempting, much
more appealing than it was before. So it's not
that there was never any dishonesty before, there was,
but now it's more appealing, and at the same
time, it's easier to get away with and not
get caught. So you've got two of those two
features more tempting and easier to get away with,
put them together, that's a bad combination, and that
is going to, I think, incentivize. Dishonesty a lot
in people's minds. Now, in the book, I go
through 6 case studies, and I think we'll probably
get into a couple of them as we go
along. Um, BUT here's one just to illustrate this
and make a little bit more concrete and also
back up the crisis word. Um, IN education. All
teachers, whether it's college, high school, middle school, even
some like lower school teachers I've, I've heard of,
are facing a real honesty crisis when it comes
to AI, uh, use by students. So, students who
are for, for, for at-home assignments, um, whether it's
a paper, right, you know, at home, or a
problem set or coding assignments, um, whatever is being
assigned for the students to be, to do at
home. Um, AND then, uh, turn it in for
a grade. The, you know, look, how the students
cheat on that in the past? Sure. Might they
have gotten together with their friends and then, you
know, shared some answers? Sure. When the internet came
along, did they sometimes go on the internet to
find answers? Sure. Uh, BUT now, with AI you
can go online. To chat GBT or cloud or
something like that, and have it do your problem
set for you in a matter of seconds, or
give the paper prompts and some examples of your
previous writing, um, and, you know, give us some,
some, some additional instructions, and it will produce in
a span of 10 seconds, a paper that's not
just acceptable, but better than you probably would have
written yourself. And so it saves immense amount of
time. And we'll probably get you a better grade.
Than what you would have done on your own.
And given that opportunity, given that capacity that we
now have, which we didn't have before, it's extremely
hard for people to resist using it. And so
it's, uh, as a result, I think a real
crisis here because uh left unchecked. Majority of students
are gonna do this. Claim it as their own
work, of course, they're not gonna acknowledge it, they're
gonna claim it, they did, they did the work.
Get better grades, and uh, in the, in the
process, plagiarize from the AI, do something dishonest, do
something morally wrong, and we've got a crisis on
our hands. And I think you talk to most
teachers, and it would not be an exaggeration to
call that a crisis.
Yeah, so I mean, please tell me if I'm
getting this right, because I mean when you say
that today there's more incentive to be dishonest and
it's easier to get away with it, I mean,
doesn't it, OK, perhaps boiling boiled down is too
strong an expression, but doesn't it have a lot
to Do with the technological developments that we've seen
over the past, I don't know, 1015, 20 years
with particularly the internet with AI and with social
media, because I mean I was just thinking about
it while you were answering my previous question, and
it seems to me that really, particularly when it
comes to online space. AND online tools, it's really
what allows for people to be dishonest in a
way that is easier and they can more easily
get away with it.
Yeah, yeah, so, so we haven't mentioned what the
other honesty crises are. Um, SO let me just
rattle them off real quickly and not expand on
them, and then I'll, uh, you'll, I'm just gonna
say yes to everything you said. Um, SO, the
other ones I talked about are, um, so in
addition to the AI student cheating. We have deep
fakes, which are connected to AI. We have, um,
celebrity and influencer culture, um, which is connected to
social media. We have sermon plagiarism and other kinds
of, uh, dishonesty in the religious context, that's also
connected to AI. Um, WE, we have, uh, political
misinformation and fake news that's being shared, that's connected
to social media. Um, WE have internet infidelity, that's
connected to the internet. Um, I think I got
them all, maybe I forgot one, but, uh, so,
all the, now that we have them on the,
on the table, we can see, yeah, what's the
thread running through all of these, um, it's technology.
Um, NOW, I don't hear me wrong, I'm not
someone who's anti-technology, and I'm not gonna say technology
is inherently dishonest. I don't think, I don't believe
that. I don't think it's inherently honest either. I
think it's inherently neutral, but it can be used
in different ways. And so what we have now
are these tools, which we didn't have 20 years
ago, that if used in with intentions of, uh,
dishonest intentions. Yeah, I mean, uh, they're very effective
in, in that regard. Um, THEY'RE very hard to
detect that, uh, afterwards that they were used in
that way, um, and they just make, uh, make
honesty harder to preserve in our culture. Um, SOME
people have wondered if there are other factors involved
too, and I don't discount that. I mean, some
have wondered like, is there erosion of moral values
in society, um, is there a decline in religion?
Is there, you know, uh, objective standards of right
and wrong? People don't believe in that as much,
and so that's also contributing to us. Crisis. So
I don't want to completely boil it down just
to technology. I mean, after all, it's people who
are using the technology and people have moral values
and standards and beliefs and the worldviews and this
kind of thing, and those can change. So I'm
sure it's more than just technology, but the big
piece for me is the technology, no doubt.
Yeah, and I mean, I was actually going also
to ask you, I'm not sure if there's research
done, psychological research or sociological research done on this
topic exactly, but do you think that people, the
same people, tend to be more dishonest online because
they have that opportunity than in their real lives,
or not?
Yeah, so. There is a bit of research, um.
But it's going to be complicated here. Um. So,
let me approach it from this direction. Um, ACTUALLY,
in the chapter where I try to give a
little bit, chapter two, I try to say things
aren't terrible, and there's some optimistic results and some
positive news where I talk about that lying research
and how people tend to not lie very much.
I end that chapter by saying, look, when it
comes to social media, there are areas of social
media where people are remarkably honest. Um, SO it
complicates the picture a bit here. Um, AND then
I'll come back to your point, and then say,
yeah, I think there are other parts of social
media where it's not so much the case and
what's going on. Um, SO, look, um, perhaps counterintuitively,
when it comes to parts of social media, people
are no more dishonest there than they are in
their real life. Uh, OK. What, what parts? Um,
EMAIL, text messaging, uh, Facebook, at least parts of
Facebook, um, even, uh, dating websites. Um, Uh, LET'S
just stick with those. Oh, and, and, and LinkedIn.
So like, uh, you know, like, um, something more
employment oriented, uh, more, more corporate. Um, AND so
there are these studies which find that there's no,
no, really no disparity, maybe a slight disparity, but
not a significant disparity, um, versus, uh, uh, real
life. For example, um, LinkedIn resumes are no more
dishonest than traditional paper resumes. Well, what's going on
here, there's a name and a record. Um, IN
all these cases, your name is attached to the
thing, and there's a, uh, capacity for screenshots and,
you know, a track record of, uh, of, of
what you said in the past, that could be
used against you and you could be held accountable
to. Um. Now we come to the other side
of uh social media and the online spaces. What
I'm talking about are typically ones where there is
no such track record. Uh, YOU can get away
with doing these things, and not be traced to
you. So, um, take, you know, take the one
we've, we, the only one we've unpacked a bit
so far is the student case. Um, IN the
student case, they can use this AI, submit the
paper, and, uh, at least given the tools we
have now, it's very hard, even if the professor
is suspicious, it's very hard for the professor to
document and prove that the student used this technology.
In a, um, in a deceitful way. So there's
that anonymity there and it's also gonna apply in
other contexts too, this is anonymity, um, that protects
the person from being held accountable, and it opens
up a space for more dishonesty, just like, I
mean, I'll I'll end here, um. It's not so
dissimilar from that game I was telling you about,
right? Like, you go in, you take the test,
uh, 2020 pounds, 50 cents per correct answer, you
verbally report, well, there's a, you're shielded because no
one's gonna know how you actually did, so you
can present yourself in a way that's different from
the true facts and not get caught. Same thing
here, you can present yourself in a different way,
um, and be shielded from the truth, and that
opens up spaces for dishonesty.
Right, I mean, when it comes to the ways
that people can be the most dishonest online and
actually harm other people by behaving that way, I
mean, earlier you mentioned deep fakes, for example, and
I guess that that can be very harmful, not
only because you're being dishonest by creating a picture
that is not real of some other person or
even yourself if you want. So, but, but, uh,
but also if you're using the image of another
person, you're violating, er, their consent. I mean, because
they're not, you're not using it with their consent
and it can harm them in several different areas
of their life depending on what the image is
and the context where it's shown. But also, I
mean on social media and even places, for example,
like Instagram, it seems like people tend to present.
A very filtered image of their life. I mean,
in a, in a way that they try to
transmit to other people that their life is much
better, much more positive than what it actually is,
and it can harm other people, perhaps even more
so young people, because they go online and they
think that everyone else except themselves is doing great
in life.
Yeah, yep, yep, yeah, so I can, I can
react to that. On the Instagram, and I'll come
back to the defakes. Um, THAT actually reminds me
of our earlier discussion of omissions. Um, SO you're
presenting a part of your life, uh, but a
very filtered part of your life, and you're omitting
other parts of your life in it, I, I,
I think in a context where it probably would
be appropriate, uh, I expect that you present a,
a complete picture. Uh, SO I, I understand where
you're coming from there. That does seem to be,
to be problematic, um. I think the deep fakes
one though can be much more problematic and much
more harmful, depending on what type of deep fake
we're talking about. However, the by far the most
common kind of deep fake is the most problematic
as well, and that's non-conceptual deep fake pornography. Um,
SO where someone's like, typically it's a female actresses.
The picture of her face is imported onto a
pornographic actress's body, and then it seems the way
the technology is right now, so, uh, sophisticated technology,
it seems like that actress Scarlett Johansson or Taylor
Swift or something like that, um, was actually engaged
in these sexual acts. Um, THAT'S, that's just, you
know, obviously, I think, wrong, but it's dishonest in
so many levels, um, which I, in the, in
the book I unpack, like, sometimes 1015, 20 different
ways in which it's dishonest, that this, I think,
uh, it is now being exploited. I mean, you
might say, well, what is, how is Taylor Swift
harmed? I mean, you know, she's a huge celebrity,
she's got billions of dollars, you know, what, what
difference does it make to her? I think it's
still there, there are clear ways in which she's
harmed. Even worse today is when this technology is
being used to um directly punish people that the
person knows in their real life. So there are
now versions of this, uh, in the US it's
a real problem at the high school level, where
high school boys are taking pictures of high school
girls, and putting them into these pornographic videos, and
then disseminating that in amongst their classmates. Bringing great
embarrassment and, you know, shame and so forth on
those girls. Of course, they didn't do it, but
just having that image in the minds of all
the classmates, and then having to, that, you know,
come to school with that image in their minds
is extremely psychologically traumatic and, and devastating. Uh, SO
that's all, all terrible stuff. Now, um, one last
note though, uh, to, to balance out the picture
a bit. There are all kinds of deep fakes
that are being generated right now for things like
educational and humanitarian purposes. And you might think, well,
you know, let's, let's present a balanced picture, like,
can it be used for good? I mean, can
it be used to actually help people? And I
think maybe in some cases, yes, but not without
dishonesty. Um, SO I, I, I know I'm giving
you a long answer, but I'll, I'll wrap it
up with, with an illustration. Um, uh, THERE was
a deep fake made of John Kennedy's speech that
he was supposed to give. Before he was ass
or so the speech he was supposed to give,
were he not assassinated. And so it's an educational
video that's out there on a historical channel, um,
and, you know, people can learn from that. They
could go and say, oh wow, this is, this
is what he was gonna talk about, and this
is how he probably would have delivered the speech,
and I could learn something more I didn't know
before. But without a disclaimer or disclosure, that's a
deep fake. IS still dishonest, um, because it's presenting
itself as if it were real. When it's not.
So we need to always with deep fakes, no
matter even if they are for good purposes or
intentions, we need to keep in mind, um, and
there needs to be some disclosure, some honesty. About
how this was made, where it comes from, and
the fact that it's not in fact real. That's
what I insist on.
Yeah, no, I'm just going to give you an
example from my personal life because I mean, I've
always been a very big George Carlin fan, and
I mean he died in 2007, very unfortunately, but
Uh, I mean, uh, 2 years ago, yeah, I
think it was 2 years ago, 2024, someone put
out on YouTube video of a supposed stand-up made
by the dad, George Carlin. I mean, it's at
least they were honest that it was completely AI
generated, but I mean, the, the thing that really
bothered me the most about it is that If
you go and listen to what he's saying, not
only does it sound like the real George Carlin,
but even the jokes sound like real George Carlin
jokes. I mean, people who used to love his
comedy very easily notice that they sound like jokes
written by the actual George Carlin. And I mean
it really bothers me because I don't even want
to give them that, but it really does sound
like George Carlin and it's it's, it's terrible because
it's absolutely the er I mean it even if
it's not completely dishonest because at least the person
is saying that it's AI generated, but I mean
it's like them, er it's like profanity
almost. Good, good, good. Yeah, I've not seen that
video, but I understand where you're coming from. I,
I might not worry too much about the dishonesty,
as you noted, um, we can debate whether there
is some dishonesty or not. Um, BUT there, there
can be other moral concerns here too. Um, THERE
are questions about, is this disrespectful, um, is this
kind of violating his autonomy? Is this, uh, you
know, violating his dignity? Can you, can you actually
wrong people who are dead? Um, CAN you wrong
someone's memory? Um, ALL kinds of other moral questions
are in the neighborhood here. And I, I would
share your view that, um, even if dishonesty is
not the main issue, uh, there are other ways
in which this is still probably the wrong thing
to do.
Yeah, so I mean, do you think that people
are just inevitably dishonest, at least to the extent
that we've already talked about when we talked about
the psychology of it, the science? Do you think
that even those times or those specific domains or
Particularly certain places, circumstances like social media where people
perhaps in particular ways tend to be particularly dishonest.
Do you think that's just inevitable or we can
do something to improve people's lives?
Yes, yes, yes, it's a lot to say here,
a big question too. You know, I, my overall
picture is a mixed character, so I don't think
people are inevitably dishonest in general, because I don't
think people are, are in general, dishonest. Um, I
think they're, they're mixed. Um, BUT your question is
more precise in, in these certain circumstances where they
tend to be dishonest, is that inevitable? Uh. I,
I would like to say no. Uh, I don't
think it's inevitable. Is it common? Could be yes.
Um, IS it frequent? Could be yes. Uh, BUT
it, are people able to change their characters over
time. There's actually good evidence in, uh, you know,
with character in general and personality in general, there's,
there's plenty of good evidence that character changes. So
whatever character you have now, you're not stuck with,
um, you're not, it's not fixed in your, in
your psychology. And that you can take active steps
to change your character. So, for good or for
bad, of course, it always has to be for
better. Um, AND also that there are age differences,
so people's character on average at 20 is different
than at at 60, and it tends to be
better at 60 than at 20. Uh, SO those
are some general points. More specific points, um, You
know, uh A couple thoughts, um. One, going back
to that test-taking scenario, we had with the 20
problems and the 150 cents per correct answer, there
was a variation that I didn't mention, where students
first signed an honor code, uh, a code of
ethics for their university, pledging that they would not
lie, cheat, or steal, steal or anything like that.
Um, And then they took the test, they graded
themselves, they verbally reported how they performed, and in
this variation, the verbal report was back down to
the control level. So on average, the performance was
showing no signs of cheating. So there's a way
in which uh the environments could be manipulated by,
uh, in such a way as to incentivize honesty,
and it prevented, it seemed like the upshot was
that it prevented people from being dishonest in that
scenario. Uh, SO, broader, now, some broader, uh, implications.
One is, uh, I think we can push back
against dishonesty, uh, at the institutional level and at
the, um, political level. Um, WE can have, uh,
legislative initiatives, I think, in with respect to things
like, like deep fakes, um, we need to have
legislative initiatives. It needs to start at the top
with laws that prohibits, for example, non-consensual deep fake
pornography, um, and, and have fines and even, uh,
criminal, uh, sentences associated with things like this, um,
that will, I think, change people's behavior, not eliminate,
of course, but disincentivize them. Um, ALSO, I think
that there are some individualistic concrete things that we
can do. Um, I'll mention just one in the
interest of time. Um, uh, WELL, sorry. I've already
mentioned one that's uh more cultural, which is things
like honor codes, and more reminders in our environment,
but I, but it's something proactive that you can
do individually, that I haven't mentioned yet, um, is
to Keep in mind the perspective of people who
are impacted by your dishonesty. Uh, RIGHT, so, you
know, if you feel like, yeah, you, you're dishonest
a lot, here's something that you can do to
try and get away from that pattern. Not gonna
eliminate, of course, but just try and shift yourself
out of, out of that pattern, is to empathetically.
Try to project yourself into the mindset of someone
who's going to be impacted by your dishonesty. I
talk about this in particular with respect to um
internet infidelity, which we haven't looked at. So, for
people who are going online and looking at pornography
websites or Ashley Masson infidelity websites or uh chat
rooms where you can have, uh, these certain kind
of conversations, uh, Think about the emotional impact. That
might have. On your significant other, were your significant
other to discover that you're doing that. Now that
obviously doesn't apply to someone who does have a
significant other, but for those who are in relationships
where there's expectations of sexual and emotional exclusivity. Imagine
how that person would feel, anger, resentment, hatred, bitterness,
betrayal. Disloyalty. All these things could well up and
powerfully. Shape how they respond to you. And if
you're empathizing with them, because you're in this relationship,
but you still care about them, and you understand,
this is what they're gonna go through. Mhm. That
could be a powerful emotional, it's always philosophical here,
it should perhaps shouldn't be primarily philosophical. Emotional change
can be more impactful sometimes than intellectualual change, you
know, that could move you. To not engage in
these behaviors anymore. Because of the impact They could
have on someone you care about.
Right, I, I mean I will just add one
thing and ask you, of course, if you agree
with this, but also when it comes to personal
relationships and romantic relationships, more specifically, if you betray
someone er that can have a long lasting impact
in their lives, because it might be the case
that they will live with that in their mind.
In every single future romantic relationship that they have
that they might be expecting to be betrayed by
other people who might not even be dishonest at
all. So I mean it's not just the impact
that you have in the moment or the next
few weeks or months after they find out that
that could be a And everlasting impact. Yeah,
I know, no, no you're right, I mean, so,
um, this. Highlights something that uh I think it's
really important to highlight, which is honesty is a
virtue, and it's connected to other really important moral
values too, one of which is trust. So trust
and honesty are highly correlated with each other, uh,
empirically and conceptually, and so if you break honesty,
if you're disloyal or dishonest towards your significant other,
Well, that is also tends to violate trust. With
this, you know, with that significant other, that the
significant other's trust with you, but not just. That,
as you said, in the moment, it's gonna be
harder in the future for that person to trust
other people too. Um, THEY'VE been betrayed, they made
themselves vulnerable. And where did it get them? It
got them betrayal, so they need a probably even
more convincing the next time that this person is
trustworthy. So that they don't have to go through
the whole thing again and be betrayed all over
again, which could arguably could be even worse again,
it's like, I can't believe it happened to me
again. I was so, you know, I was foolish
enough the first time, and now I let myself
get betrayed again. That's, yeah, that's, that's that. So,
so honesty and trust are highly linked, um, and
they're, they have to be earned. And if they're
betrayed, it's hard to get them back again.
So I have just one last question, and this
is actually something that I just thought about last
week or something like that because it came to
mind when I was thinking about honesty. I mean,
do you think that Uh, inconsistency, I mean people
just being inconsistent in terms of their commitments, in
terms of saying that they're going to do something,
but then just almost out of nowhere, uh, changing
their minds when they're very volatile and erratic with
their behavior. Do you think that that can itself
be a form of dishonesty? Even more so if
the person is already aware that they have those
kinds of tendencies, but they don't disclose it and
they just commit, for example, to doing something that
they know there's a high probability that they will
not fulfill that commitment. Interesting,
yeah, yeah, this is. I haven't a direct answer,
but I, I have a, uh, but it's not
directly to your question, um, and then I, I
will say I haven't thought about your question specifically
in, in a lot of details. It's quite intriguing.
The, the direct answer um is that there are
forms of inconsistency which are clearly dishonest. Um, AND
I don't think there's much debate about it. So,
for example, hypocrisy is a kind of dishonesty. Uh,
YOU know, you're presenting yourself one way, like, you
present yourself as, uh, You know, crusading for animal
rights, and we need to be vegans, and it's
terrible to consume animals, and then secretly, you're eating
hamburgers and hot dogs and so forth. So that's
just straightforwardly hypocritical, um, as a kind of inconsistency,
and it's also straightforwardly dishonest. Similarly, with um self-deception.
It's got inconsistency there, that's also dishonest. Um, WHAT
you're talking about is, I think more, more nuanced
and subtle, and that's where I don't have a
thought out a response, but I'll, I'll at least
say some things, um. So you're thinking about about
someone who's a bit, it's just more um inconsistent
in their day to day lives as far as
maybe they have kind of uh erratic tendencies, or
they, um, they kind of have trouble focusing on
one thing and they kind of go from here
to there, um, or they have emotional outbursts that
lead them to not follow through on their commitments.
Um, THOSE kinds of behaviors by themselves, I wouldn't
automatically think of as dishonest. Um, THAT just like
seemed like part of their character and, and, and
how they behave, um. But they're not, it's not
like they're um violating their moral, their expressed moral
commitments to others, um. This way. However, what you
added to this was, what if they know this
about themselves, and then they don't disclose this to
others, knowing this about themselves. That I think is,
is problematic, yes, um, so, you know, if you
like something really important, like a big project at
work, and you say, yeah, no problem, I'm gonna
deliver, I can deliver on that project, and the
whole team is counting on you. And yet you
know about yourself that you're actually quite flaky or
erratic, or, you know, like, sometimes you deliver, sometimes
you don't, and you don't disclose that to the
team. Um, uh, THAT, that I think is, is
problematic, um, and, uh, problematic from an honesty perspective.
Um, THAT'S, that's probably something goes back to also
our missions, that's probably something that the team should
know about. And if they still trust you, that's
OK. Well then you've, you, you've wiped your hands,
also going back to your point about like wiping
your hands. Uh, YEAH, at least I, I told
you. I tried my best, but I didn't deliver
because I, you know, I'm this kind of person.
I, I, I, I disclosed that. I was honest,
you were on board with me doing it, you
trusted me, comes back to trust too, um, uh,
then I think, yeah, OK, um, no problem. But
if you don't disclose that to the team, and
you know that about yourself, and then you don't
deliver on the project. Yeah, your dishonesty has come
back to haunt you.
Mhm. Yeah, I, I think that we would have
more to discuss about that topic specifically, but uh
I mean, we've already done an hour here, so,
uh, the book is again The Honesty Crisis Preserving
our Most treasured virtue in an increasingly dishonest world,
and there's the cover for the hardcover again, so.
Uh, Christian, thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. As I
said, it's always a great pleasure to talk to
you, and I hope to have the opportunity of
having you on the show again somewhere in the
future.
Always a great pleasure, honestly, and I'd love to
come back in the future. So thank you for
your time.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Janus Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.